=pod

=head1 NAME

B<verity> - generates truth tables of logical statements

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<verity> [B<-P> | B<-p> | B<-t> | B<-l>] [B<-s>] [B<-o> I<outfile>] [B<-e> I<statements> | I<infile>]

B<verity> [B<-h> | B<-V>]

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<Verity> is a utility for generating truth tables for sets of logical
statements.  Output can be as plain text, a TeX table, a LaTeX I<tabular>
environment, or a PostScript document.  The statements can be read from the
standard input or an I<infile> or simply passed to B<verity> on the command
line as the argument to an B<-e> flag.  The syntax for the statements is
descriped below under L</"STATEMENT SYNTAX">.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over

=item B<-e> I<statements>

B<Verity> treats I<statements>, along with the arguments of any following B<-e>
switches, as newline-terminated input.  If I<infile> is also specified on the
command line, it is ignored.

=item B<-h>

Display a summary of the command-line options and exit.

=item B<-l>

Output is in the form of LaTeX C<tabular> environments.  If the B<-s> option is
also specified, the tabulars are centered.

=item B<-o> I<outfile>

Output is written to file I<outfile>.

=item B<-P>

Output the tables as a single PostScript document.

=item B<-p>

Output is as plain text.  This is the default.

=item B<-s>

(La)TeX output is ``standalone,'' i.e., a complete document rather than a
fragment suitable for importing into another document.  This option has no
effect on plain text tables or PostScript documents.

=item B<-t>

Output is in the form of centered TeX tables.

=item B<-V>

Display version information & exit

=back

=head1 STATEMENT SYNTAX

Statements consist of individual letters (considered case-sensitively)
representing boolean variables and combined with logical AND (C<^>, C<&>, or
C<&&>), logical inclusive OR (C<v>, C<|>, or C<||>), and/or logical exclusive
OR (C<x>, C<X>, or C<+>) to form logical expressions.  (In order to use a
variable named C<x>, C<X>, or C<v>, the letter must be preceded by a
backslash.) Statements may be grouped within parentheses and negated with C<->,
C<!>, or C<~>.  They may also be combined with C<< -> >>, which results in a
statement which is false if & only if the left statement is true & the right
statement false, and C<< <-> >> (or C<=> or C<==>), which creates a statement
which is true if & only if both the left & right statements have the same
boolean value.  Parentheses and the negation operator have the highest & second
highest precedence, respectively, followed by the AND, OR, and XOR operators,
then C<< -> >>, and finally C<< <-> >>.  All binary operators are
left-associative.  Whitespace (other than newlines) is ignored.

Statements are delimited by semicolons or newlines (though a backslash at the
end of a line causes the newline to be ignored, thus letting a single statement
continue over multiple lines), and all statements listed in the input file are
output in the resulting truth table.  There is no need to list the variables
explicitly, as any variables used will be automatically placed at the left end
of the table in the order in which they appear in the file.  A variable can
have the truth value of a specific statement assigned to it by prefixing the
statement with the variable followed by a colon.

Multiple tables can be output by grouping the statements for each table between
braces.  The set of variables to output will be reset for each table.

Comments can also be inserted into the input, beginning with a pound sign
(C<#>) and continuing to the end of the line.  The end of a line in a comment
does not constitute a statement delimiter, so a semicolon or extra newline is
required if a new statement is to immediately follow.

=head1 EXAMPLES

The following line causes B<verity> to output the combined truth table for the
statements ``p AND q'' and ``p OR q'':

    p ^ q; p v q

As plain text, the output for the above is:

    p|q|p^q|pvq
    -|-|---|---
    T|T| T | T
    T|F| F | T
    F|T| F | T
    F|F| F | F

For a somewhat more complex example, consider the following statements.  Note
that the statement C<p || -q> is assigned to the variable C<S> for ease of
reference in the statement after it.

    -p x q
    S : p || -q
    S -> q&r
    pvr <-> !(~p ^ ~r)

When input to B<verity>, the above statements yield the truth table:

    p|q|r|-pxq|S : pv-q|S->q^r|pvr<->-(-p^-r)
    -|-|-|----|--------|------|--------------
    T|T|T| T  |   T    |  T   |      T
    T|T|F| T  |   T    |  F   |      T
    T|F|T| F  |   T    |  F   |      T
    T|F|F| F  |   T    |  F   |      T
    F|T|T| F  |   F    |  T   |      T
    F|T|F| F  |   F    |  T   |      T
    F|F|T| T  |   T    |  F   |      T
    F|F|F| T  |   T    |  F   |      T

Note that the operator symbols are all reset to ones that resemble the standard
mathematical notation.

=head1 RESTRICTIONS

Assignment of statements to variables with the colon operator should be done
before the variable is used in any other statements.  Otherwise, the behavior
is undefined.  Similarly, assigning more than one statement to the same
variable also leads to undefined behavior.

Currently, the PostScript output takes no special steps to deal with tables
going off the edge of the page; if one table reaches the bottom, any tables
after it won't show up.

=head1 SEE ALSO

L<http://github.com/jwodder/Verity>

=head1 AUTHOR

John T. Wodder II <jwodder@sdf.lonestar.org>

=head1 COPYRIGHT

Copyright 2007, 2008 by John T. Wodder II

B<Verity> is distributed under the GNU General Public License, v.3.0 or later.
There is NO warranty; not even for MERCHANTABILITY or FITNESS FOR A PARTICULAR
PURPOSE.

=cut
